It's been a couple of years since our last interview
with Christine Arena, and she's finished her
much-awaited book, The High Purpose Company.
In her first book, Cause For Success,
Christine reviewed companies that passed the litmus test
for their commitment for social responsibility.
In her new book, she continues to look into
the board rooms and bottom lines of companies
for whom there is no turning back
from the commitments they have made
to leave the earth a better place.
Some of them will surprise you.
We're moving on from Cause for Success.
Yes.
This project has been,
first of all, congratulations.
Thank you.
It's a wonderful book.
I'm anxious to share it with a number of people.
What inspired you, from that point,
to continue on into this?
What was really the purpose of going further
into The High Purpose Company?
I would say it was this surge in investment
that companies are making in, quote,
"corporate responsibility," so every company
that's featured in Cause For Success, my first book,
approached corporate responsibility in a strategic way.
They ended up making a big difference for the planet
and for their shareholders.
In this next book, we looked at companies
that were spending tens of millions of dollars
every year on advertising or public relations
that tried to position them as a good citizen,
as a company that cares about society,
that cares about the planet and the future
of the planet.
What I did with the team of researchers,
is we put their words to the test.
This is a book that helps people
to finally distinguish between true and false
corporate responsibility.
Yes, and an excellent job.
Toward the beginning of it,
you have a little page there that pretty much
gives you thumbs up, sideways,
or a thumbs down so you can get
a really quick sketch of some of the companies.
As in your last book, some of it's really surprising.
There are companies that get the thumbs up
that no one would every guess.
That's right.
I really want to get into some of those specific stories
because I think we'll all find it quite interesting.
One of the things you talk about in here
is companies don't need to make the choice
between doing well and doing good,
and that is not a grammatical error,
for the record.
Right.
Could you explain that?
There is this outdated notion that in order to
make a difference in the world,
you need to sacrifice profitability.
We found that in some cases,
when a company just throws money at a philanthropy
but then continues to operate in a certain way
that seems contrary to the position it's taking
through that philanthropic association,
they actually do lose money.
They actually don't benefit because society
doesn't buy what they're trying to sell,
so a level of backlash is created against the company.
The company then has to spin its wheels
and spend more money on publicity,
potentially legal, and all kinds of things
that really don't work.
Then there are companies, really smart companies
like DuPont, GE, JetBlue,
imperfect companies to be sure,
but these companies are investing billions every year
on environmental technologies, or on solutions
to unmet world needs and problems
ranging from water scarcity, which as you know,
effects about a quarter of the planet's population,
to global warming, which effects all of us,
to poverty.
Those companies have absolutely proven to Wall Street,
not just the common man, that this really represents
what they're calling "late markets" or emerging markets,
real strategic opportunities and growth opportunities.
The companies that are actually making
the biggest difference and investing the most in this,
are not the companies that people would think.
It's not necessarily--
You named a few of them and we're going to go into
a couple of others because I love the stories behind them.
Would you say that, overall,
as you journeyed through this project,
that this is going to become the defining factor,
corporate responsibility is going to become
the defining factor in the future
because there is a significant enough shift
in the consciousness of the consumer?
Has that happened yet?
We have absolutely reached a tipping point.
I think where we are is that companies are realizing
that they need to redifine corporate responsibility
because it's not so much about
trying to be responsible in a typical sense,
it's about being responsive to the demands,
as you're pointing out, of the public.
We have access to information like you were just saying,
like your network proves, that we did not have access to
ten years ago.
When something happens with Chevron in Nigeria,
and something goes awry, we find out about it in real time.
That's a totally different climate.
That sets a completely different precedence
than what we were dealing with ten years ago
and fifteen years ago.
If you couple that with the power of capitalism,
moving all of these financial resources
towards these fantastic sustainable solutions,
and then you look at the customer support for all of this,
and the consciousness, like you're saying,
definitely there's a movement and it's not a trend.
It is the way things are progressing and evolving.
Which is good news.
I think so.
Let's take one that was highly controversial.
A movie was made, in essence, about it
that was quite popular.
Leonardo Dicaprio, Blood Diamond, we're talking De Beers.
Can you talk about what has happened with De Beers
after having a very bloody, and certainly tainted, past?
De Beers does not pass my litmus test.
I would like to say that before I talk about De Beers.
This is such a good example.
As you know, the conflict in regions from which
diamonds are sourced is so intense,
and even with the Kimberley process,
which De Beers has now signed onto,
which is supposed to give some proof positive
as to where those diamonds came from
and how they were sourced,
that's not even 100% foolproof.
The fact is that De Beers realized,
based on all kinds of things,
based on its inability to compete in the United States
for a while and operate retail in the United States
to all of the backlash it got in Europe, throughout Europe,
throughout the world, really.
People accused them of operating like a cartel.
They realized that in order to continue to do business
we have to face these issues just like R.J. Reynolds
or Philip Morris.
That is one class of company, and those companies
are not the companies making the biggest difference.
They're just being reactive, verses proactive.
What I do in A High Purpose Company is highlight
the companies that are being proactive about this
because there's a big difference in terms of
the difference that De Beers makes currently
compared to what it could make
if it took a totally different approach.
Even with a company and entity like De Beers,
they're being forced through consciousness,
they're being forced through public awareness,
to either lose their share entirely,
have people boycott diamonds across the board,
certainly in western countries,
or have to shape up a bit.
That's right.
Have they really made any significant progress?
They are making significant progress.
You're describing a change or die theme.
That is exactly what's going on in the corporate world.
It's change or die.
You can see it in the automotive industry.
Evolve your business model,
evolve to more sustainable forms of transportation
or die in the sense of losing market share
to the companies that are, like Honda and Toyota.
You can definitely see it the diamond,
well, De Beers is a bizarre situation 'cause they own
like 90% of the diamond market.
They basically are, but you can definitely see it
with companies in the coffee business,
which is actually, that affects the lives
of hundreds of millions of people,
companies like Starbucks.
There is this change or die theme.
There is this theme that evolution is the way forward.
I think innovation has now been applied
to this space of corporate responsibility
and I think that that is what everybody
is talking about right now.
I think that that's what will lead trends
over the next decade.
Let's talk more about change or die.
American Airlines.
Again, you're pointing out a company
that has yet to catch up with what I would consider
a really great example.
Are JetBlue and Southwest pretty much
toward the leading edge of that?
Oh yeah, definitely, Southwest is fabulous.
Let's take the big, lumbering American
and then we'll go into the difference
and we'll reflect that against Southwest.
American Airlines, the airlines are just notorious
for offering people terrible service.
They have always had this very pithy relationship
with their own employees.
It's always been this battle between the unions
and their management at the airlines,
and there was always a lack of communication
or breakdown.
That has been historic problem for the entire category.
American Airlines realized that, and so they
started listening to their people for a change.
They started asking people, reaching out
to their employees and saying,
"We're in trouble, financially, and we don't want to ask you
"to take another pay cut, so what we're gonna ask you
"to do is come to us with good ideas
"of how we can save money, how we can be
"a more effective airline, and we will reward you
"based on those contributions."
I know some of the specifics in that.
Some of the stories you tell that the workers
are really quite creative when put to a task.
After they put it out there, they came up with
some ingenius solutions that would, literally,
save millions of dollars a year for the airline.
Can you talk about a couple of them?
One will talk about the psychology behind that.
What they're doing is they're empowering people
to be a part of the change verses just
working and being treated as a cog on a wheel,
which people don't like.
Human beings don't like that.
They're not creative under those circumstances,
and that effects a business, a business's ability
to compete, even.
One of the ideas came from one of the mechanics
that works on the plane as the plane pulls in,
and they've got to service things before the plane
takes off five minutes later to go back across the country
because, of course, they never give these planes
any rest, the planes don't have unions.
He decided, instead of throwing all of these
drill bits away, what if we came up with a better drill bit
that, and this sounds like a random example,
but that lasted longer and that was much more effective,
and what if we replaced this part with this part?
That little thing, and then he came up with,
he rigged this machine to be able to change those
drill bits on a more rapid pace.
That saved the company, I think,
about a quarter of a million dollars in the first year.
It was a great idea.
The guy's a union guy.
He's never been treated nicely by anyone at the company,
probably, and now this is the first time
people are listening to him and going,
"Hey, that's a great idea."
Then, the press picks it up so he gets publicity
and it's a fantastic thing for him.
All kinds of people in American Airlines
started to do the same thing, and that really, again,
changed the psychology of the company,
of the relationship the company had with its employees,
which then affected the customer experience
because, of course, you've been on a flight
where people are very upset and hostile,
and that's probably because...
Because sometimes they're surly with you.
Right, and sometimes that tone is set from the top.
Absolutely.
What has the net affect been on American Airlines?
So far, it has been morale has increased.
They've had some financial savings,
but that morale, for a company that is on the brink,
was on the brink of bankruptcy, is really important.
Right.
My book shows this ladder
of corporate responsibility effectiveness.
The higher companies climb the ladder,
the more of a difference they make,
the more the net impact of their particular strategy,
so the bigger the results, the rewards,
financially, socially, and environmentally.
The companies in the beginning initial rungs
make a nice impact, but it's not life-changing.
But you have to start somewhere,
and we're talking about some companies
that are struggling along, it's change or die,
and they're starting somewhere,
and just taking a little look at where they're starting.
Let's take an airline that, for example, is known to be
more proactive, I would think, is Southwest Airlines.
How do you compare the two
in terms of their corporate responsibility
and why you would place one above the other
in terms of high purpose?
Southwest and JetBlue, I put in the same class
in the sense that they are both purpose-driven companies.
For Southwest, it is all about improving
people's experience, and JetBlue has a slant on that,
and they say their higher purpose is to bring humanity
back to air travel, which is so relevant right now.
Of course, we all know what happened with JetBlue,
which I think is a really interesting story,
a couple of months ago with the stranded passengers
on the tarmac for ten hours.
What was interesting to me, more than that event,
'cause I was one of the stranded passengers,
not on the tarmac, but I was trying to get to JFK,
was, of course there was a whole meltdown
in telecommunications, of course there were
thousands of stranded passengers.
I was fascinated by the way the press
covered that meltdown because what they were doing
was they were showing, they were trying to
knock JetBlue out of its territory as being
a service-driven airline.
If this had happened to Southwest, I can guarantee
that the press probably, and competitive airlines
probably would have wanted to do the same thing.
The press was covering the meltdown,
and then they went right to people like Ralph Nader
talking about the need for congressional push
for a passenger Bill of Rights.
What they didn't cover was Dave Neeleman's response,
the CEO of JetBlue's response to the people
who were stranded, the airline's response
to those stranded passengers, and the airline's decision
to proactively institute a Bill of Rights,
which, by the way, other airlines were not happy about
because that's akin to GM fighting forward
and saying, "Ford, don't put seatbelts in your cars,"
in 1972 because that'll make us put, same thing.
This was an unpopular thing, but they did that,
and they are making these major operational changes
based on the meltdown.
With an airline like Southwest or JetBlue,
both airlines constantly listen to their people.
They're not arrogant. They apologize when things go wrong.
They proactively institute better policies.
They do not claim to be perfect, and that's what they
have in common.
But they are humane.
That's exactly right, that is humane.
It is humanity that is making the difference
rather than the perception of humanity.
Exactly.
Before we go into any other companies
and some of the really fabulous high purpose companies
that you profiled here, let's talk about the perception
of corporate responsibility.
In fact, a few examples would be good,
verses real corporate responsibility because that's,
in a certain way, almost sociopathic
to represent your company in such a way
and then, essentially, operate in opposition to that,
but this happens all the time for the spin.
It happens all the time.
In fact, the companies and industries
that spend the most money on corporate responsibility
related advertising or PR are the most contentious.
They are the pharmaceutical companies,
they are the oil companies.
They're the companies whose profits and interests
lie here, and their messages, in many cases
but not all, but definitely in many cases, lie here.
Let me tell you something.
What's in this book is probably, especially in Chapter 2,
when I outline the companies where there's a huge gap
between what they say and what they do,
I couldn't print the bulk of the interviews I actually did
because what we wanted to do in this study
was really get to the bottom of,
is a company like Merck, that says it puts patients first,
and isn't that interesting that it launched that
$40 million campaign on top of the Vioxx scandal?
Is it really putting patients first?
We talked to whistleblowers inside the FDA,
we talked to doctors who were hired to promote Vioxx,
tons of that testimony, as well as the testimony we got
on behalf of plaintiffs, we spoke to plaintiff attorneys
who were involved in litigation against oil companies
and so forth, and whistleblowers.
We couldn't print a lot of that for reasons of libel.
I understand.
Even if what someone is telling you is the truth,
in some forms of media--
Doesn't mean you can put it out there.
You can't print it.
What I'm trying to say here is that the discrepancies
in some companies between what they say,
what they spend millions of dollars saying,
and what they do, is so vast that it's almost ridiculous.
For a company whose profits, growth,
and competitive edge rely on petroleum resources,
to say that it is
all about renewable energy and the future,
when it is spending the bulk of its research and development
dollars, 99.8% of that money on
trying to untap new sources of oil, that's completely,
it looks like pure marketing cover, and maybe it is,
it probably is, certainly to the stakeholders we talked to,
and again, we interviewed hundreds of people for this book.
They certainly indicated that they felt that way.
I think that you are savvy enough to know
that when you see the fairy dust and daisies,
that's not all there is to the story.
That's right.
For example, big pharmaceutical industry,
but you're talking about a very close relationship
between the skin of the advertisement
and the survival of America, in particular,
but also other countries, of the media.
Oh, yeah, exactly.
This is a dance. That's why we hear so much.
That's why we see the little fairy dust sprinkled
over the woman as she's falling asleep to this
particular drug after she's--
Right.
That really is the crux of the problem
because you're not seeing Patagonia.
There are a few of them in here,
but most of the companies that are really working
with purpose, you're not going to see them reflected
in the media.
No, because they don't need to, because they're authentic.
They don't need to fabricate some elaborate story.
Let me tell you something.
If you go to monsanto.com, and you read the language
they use to describe corporate responsibility,
Monsanto says, "When you look at Monsanto,
"what you see is a socially responsible company."
That's a direct quote.
Can you imagine me sitting here and saying,
"When you look at me, you're gonna see a smart,
"et cetera, et cetera," how arrogant.
Fabulous, award-winning author.
Smart people don't have to tell us they're smart,
cool people don't have to tell us they're cool.
Good companies shouldn't have to tell us
that they're good, and they also should definitely
not say, "When you see me, you see good,"
because of course that's a clue into their darker side,
and people get that.
The entanglement between the media,
in fact, most of the news programs
are supported by these very entities you're talking about.
Yes.
Now you're aligning, quote, "The news of the day,"
the, quote, "credibility" of the news organization
with slippery tales from these companies.
These are also the biggest lobbies.
And the biggest lobbies.
That is one of the problems we have as a culture,
and why we buy so much into it,
but now, as you say, when you start looking
at the other side, if you start looking
at the lighter side, there are some other players
who are making in roads, even in a big way.
Let's talk Toyota.
Sure. Toyota's not perfect.
A lot of people get angry when I go
and I talk about Toyota's investments.
Toyota has said, and I want to talk about
the Law of Attraction, because this is related
to what Toyota is doing.
Toyota said, "Our purpose is to make
"sustainable mobility a reality, so we intend to make
"the internal combustion engine obsolete."
Using the company's greatest strengths,
drawing upon the enormous intellect at Toyota,
and by enabling creativity, and by saying
change is the way forward, innovation is the way forward,
they manifest that reality.
They are not 100% driven by their
investments in fuel cell, or hybrid vehicles,
or electric vehicles.
The Who Killed the Electric Car thing is really interesting.
That's a very interesting documentary.
Certainly, they've put a huge stake in the ground.
Here's the thing, the stake in the ground
can't be removed now because it's so profitable
to the company.
Toyota's benefiting to such a degree through its
investments in environmentally sound technologies
that it can't afford to stop investing.
That's what the companies that pass my litmus test do.
They could not survive without their higher purpose,
just like society would be worse off without them.
That is a very different look at corporate responsibility
because I'm not saying,
"Which companies are the best citizens?
"Which companies are the perfect good ones?"
I'm saying, "Which ones are making such significant
"investments that they're making such a difference
"to their shareholders that they can't stop?"
It's forced evolution.
By upholding their corporate responsibility.
That's right.
They've passed a point of no return.
Right, and that's interesting.
Some of the people that, let's talk about some companies
that started out with that heart and soul intact
to begin with, and managed to make it, sometimes,
even against the odds.
Patagonia is a great example of a company
that was founded.
Patagonia's customer is an outdoor enthusiast,
is someone who engages with the environment
in a very real way, almost everyday.
It's so passionate about that, so they were
founded with that vision, and they stayed with it,
even during the times where the company
had difficulty, financially.
They would never give that up because that's
core to who they are, and that's why they're successful.
Frankly, Patagonia, in the interviews I've had with them,
this is so fascinating, this psychology,
they refused to describe themselves as being
environmentally responsible, which is so interesting.
But it makes sense.
When I was reading that portion of the book,
they know that there are things they still
could be doing better.
That's right.
It's the whole notion of when you really understand
the magnitude of the environmental problems we face,
then you know that any small solution,
whether it's making a fleece from soda bottles,
or using more organic cotton, is not enough.
Good enough never is, and it's sort of
this ongoing creative discontent,
and that drives these companies forward.
It's a fascinating psychology.
Again, looking at the language of a company
from Patagonia to say,
"We're not arrogant enough to call ourselves
"an environmental leader."
That's actually what they say.
"We don't consider ourselves an environmental leader."
But Exxon calls itself an environmental leader,
and it's advertising saying,
"We are the one company doing X, Y, and Z."
Ironic.
Totally different.
What about SC Johnson & Son?
That's kind of interesting.
I love that company.
That is a company that I love and it's because
nobody would think of SC Johnson Company,
with products like Shout, Windex,
that's right, Windex, Raid.
I wouldn't have looked there.
What they do is instead of just marketing,
they don't just put a green label on their products.
What they do is they figure out,
what chemicals are we using?
They align with Environmental Protection Agency and say,
"We're gonna come up with a process called green list,
"and that is all about looking at the nature
"of what we're putting into our products
"and making sure that we use as many non-toxic
"materials, ingredients, as possible,
"and we're going to come up with a rating system,
"and our goal is to get to the highest level
"of environmental integrity," and they're doing it.
They're being tremendously successful by doing that,
and nobody would know that in Windex, actually,
there are a lot of merits to this company's products,
and it's really on this curve where, again,
because of the investments it has made
in what goes on behind the scenes, it can't stop.
It's definitely past the point of no return.
In fact, SC Johnson doesn't even consider that
social responsibility, they just think it's the way
they were, which is actually a great thing.
It is.
Why is it that people don't really know this story, though?
They haven't told it.
So many companies are so focused on doing better
that they forget to tell their story.
That's refreshing.
Patagonia has had the same problem,
where consumers were thinking that REI,
one of their competitors, was a little bit more
environmentally responsible.
Patagonia was like, "Whoa, we do way more than REI."
REI is doing some great things but they're saying,
"Wait a minute," and it was because they don't
talk about it.
I guess there's a fine line between tooting your own horn,
and reaching out to the public and letting them know
the real value that they're abusing.
I was very pleasantly surprised to find out
about SC Johnson.
I was shocked, actually.
That's one of the last places I would have looked
for environmental responsibility
simply because I was ignorant of their story.
I say this, and I have no incentive to say this at all,
but I really believe that Fisk Johnson,
the CEO of SC Johnson takes it to heart.
I really believe that deep down, just like John Mackey
of Whole Foods, or the leaders of these companies,
Yvon Chouinard, I believe that this is so important
to him, and he's going to continue with this path.
It's a privately owned company,
so they can do what they want.
They don't have to worry about if it costs
a little more upfront.
For them, it actually hasn't.
It's saved them money in a lot of areas,
and it's made them money in others.
That's a good thing, too.
A big one, big one in the modern,
the culture of modern consumerism,
which is Ikea.
I love Ikea.
A good story.
It is because Ikea was founded
by an eccentric...
I can never pronounce his name,
Ingvar Kamprad is the name of the founder,
and I apologize to him if I just mispronounced
his name.
I'm glad you said it because I was wondering
if I was going to have to say it.
He was ridiculed by the press for a track that he wrote
in 1970, I think it was '78 when the company was founded,
around that time, saying,
"Everyone who works here is equal, we are egalitarian,
"Let's forge ahead with this great vision."
He had this great language, which I'm, of course,
misquoting, but it was this very esoteric, spiritual,
almost like a utopian stance on what he wanted
his company to be about.
The press, especially in the UK, who can be brutal,
would completely just rip on him
and make it sound like it was some kind of a cult.
Give me a break.
What was fascinating is we looked
at how that, quote, "cult" grew to be one of the most
dominating and successful retailers
in the history of retailing.
What happens within an Ikea store,
and what happens behind the scenes is just fascinating.
That company exists to
bring the masses something that they feel separated from,
which is this ability to have really nice things.
To live stylishly.
They treat the people in their company in such a way.
They have, actually, anti-bureaucracy weeks
where the people in the board room
actually go to the sales floor,
the people on the sales floor go to corporate
and they're constantly shifting ideas back and forth
between those two groups.
Everyone can be who they are, there is very little
political undertone at that company, and, again,
they have that good enough never is mentality.
They're not arrogant and, again, that's why you don't
think of them as a responsible company because
they don't talk about it, they don't toot their own horn.
You think of them as big and cheap.
That's right.
And stylish.
The difference between their model is that
it's not cheap at any cost.
Right, right.
They're extremely frugal, and that even means
in terms of the resources they use, which is why
they'll use particle board and things like that
because their environmental integrity of that
kind of thing is much better than, even,
sustainably sourced wood.
It's much easier on the environment.
That's why they're making furniture
out of recycled egg cartons.
Part of their philosophy, which I found interesting,
is that the whole, you build it yourself at home element,
is actually part of his belief system,
in that hard work, and participation, and building,
and creating is good for a person.
It's very socialistic, almost communist, it's fascinating,
but it works, and that is why you have to set up
your own furniture.
One of his philosophies is to help people help themselves.
That literally means that customers help themselves,
but helping themselves, he also meant it like,
just like you're saying, hard work is good for you.
It's good for you that you got to
put this furniture together.
By the way, flat shipping it saves enormously on CO2,
which is another thing people don't really think about,
but it's true.
Yes, that makes total sense, and packaging,
and resources in terms of forestry industry.
It must be working.
Another thing I picked up out of the book was that,
I think you mentioned in Britain, that there are more
Ikea catalogs read on a Sunday than the Bible.
It is true.
That's some real penetration as a market.
There are more Ikeas printed, and distributed,
and out there right now.
They say that something like, I think it's like a quart,
no, I can't remember what statistic I reported.
It's a true statistic.
Maybe it's an eighth of all people in certain areas
were conceived on an Ikea bed.
It's something like such a ridiculous penetration
and such an incredible company that it's become,
and it's fascinating because the frenzy around Ikea
is so significant.
We found extreme Ikea advocates that have websites
that are dedicated to Ikea and the values of the founder.
We talked to some of those bloggers.
We're like, "Why are you spending your day
"talking about Ikea? Don't you have anything better to do?"
Their stories why they're doing it is very interesting.
People are just drawn to the company
because what the company's doing,
it's more than just a retail company.
There's something happening at Ikea
this fascinating, esoteric quality that it offers people,
it is so authentic.
Just the way you walk in and the sign that says,
"Valkommen," and the Swedish meatballs.
It's like Disneyworld, but it's a very engaging model,
and it's something that other retailers have, thus far,
not been able to replicate, at least not on a mass scale.
They really insist that the employee,
which is called a coworker, actually,
that the coworkers invest themselves in it,
before they even begin, by reading,
I don't know what you call it,
not their corporation bible, but the story
of their company, and understanding the philosophy.
They have to read this book before they even
take their place on the floor to help people.
They're really part of the program.
They're part of the philosophy.
They're part of the experience that is Ikea,
which is a neat one.
It is.
One company that you mention in here as the ultimate
high purpose company, which I was also
very intrigued with is Wainwright Bank & Trust.
That's my favorite bank in the entire world.
Talk about that because we're at a very adversarial--
Besides Muhammad Yunus and his work,
which I also love.
Let's talk about both of them because
I think a lot of people have an innate distrust
of the banks, especially if they've learned
anything about the industry.
Let's talk about why they're different.
Sure.
Wainwright has danced to its own tune,
just like Ikea.
That's really interesting that some of these companies
have in common, they do not follow the herd.
They figure out what it is they stand for,
and they go for it.
They don't care if they step on toes,
or if they offend people, they're true to their core.
They're authentic.
Wainwright could not be more authentic.
That is a Boston based bank that,
since its inception, has stood for social justice issues.
When I say stood for social justice issues,
I don't mean just throwing some money at a philanthropy
or doing a little promotion here and there,
I mean lobbying hard for the rights of same sex couples,
and for people living with AIDS, and for the homeless,
and reverse engineering banking products,
lending products that meet the needs of
disenfranchised members of their community,
and becoming one of the most successful banks
in terms of customer retention, loyalty, repeat business
because of that stance.
They have literally treaded where no other
American bank that I could find has ever treaded.
Not enough people know about them.
More people need to know more about
what Wainwright is doing.
I think they are probably the most progressive
bank in America, no question.
Your book's doing well.
Hopefully more people will know as a result of that.
I hope so.
What was the other person you mentioned, or entity
you mentioned that you liked as well as Wainwright?
You just said a name a bit ago.
I didn't catch it or write it down at the time.
Oh, the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh,
Muhammad Yunus's bank?
Yes.
That was a story that I covered in my first book,
Cause For Success, and Muhammad Yunus,
he's known as a banker to the poor.
In fact, he just won a Nobel Prize.
When I was writing the book, and when I was
engaging with him through that interview process,
it was rumored that he was in contention for that
Nobel Prize, but he hadn't been awarded the prize yet.
What he does is he goes into, obviously Bangladesh,
he goes into local villages, and is especially interested
in helping women raise themselves above the poverty line
through micro lending.
He was one of the pioneers of micro lending
and micro finance.
His model has been extraordinarily successful,
and it's been replicated all over the world at this point.
When you say micro lending,
we're talking about loans as little as $500--
Or even $5.
Or $300 or two, yes, exactly, to really get someone--
We're talking small.
He's put systems in place that deal with the realities
faced by these people, faced by people
who rely on each other for support,
so he forms little support groups
and everybody takes responsibility
for everybody else's loan.
It's almost like a co op or something because
they keep each other in line,
they keep each other honest,
not that they wouldn't be honest.
People are extremely honest.
In fact, he's proven that the poor, they're so noble
and they're so consistent in terms of paying
their loans back, that his repayment and default rate,
he has a 99.5, I think, percent rate of repay
on the loans he issues.
If you can find me one major American bank
that can say the same thing, especially now
with all the defaults going on and mortgages and so forth,
that's astonishing.
It is, in fact, there's a documentary we also feature
on our site called In Debt We Trust,
and that was a point that he made quite well.
I think the twist to that one, as I recall,
is that a lot of the traditional banking industry
take advantage of those who are in an
economically disenfranchised group, and charge them
extraordinarily high rates of interest for small loans,
knowing that the character of these people
is honest by nature, and they exploit it.
That's the way our whole financial system works.
People who need loans the most
are the least likely to get them,
and the people who really don't need money
or credit get tons of it.
And they're the ones least likely to pay it back,
and default on these multi-million dollar loans.
In America, it's slightly different, but yes,
many of them are, especially if they are
very specific loans.
What's fascinating about this whole micro capitalism
movement is that it's moved from institutional
in the sense that a bank is lending,
to private and there are a couple of websites
out there where you can actually...
I wish I remember the name of it.
It's terrible to blank out on it.
If you remember when we're done here,
I'll go ahead and put it up on the site.
Please do, because you can actually go and learn about
people all over the world and what their needs are,
and sometimes they need as little as $50 or $100
and you can directly finance someone who wants to
sell peanut butter in Malaysia.
It's fascinating, I'm not kidding.
It's so neat 'cause you form a personal relationship
with these people.
You're helping them. Your $50 goes a long way.
Then, you can take the money when you finally
get paid back, and you can lend it somewhere else.
That's global community.
It is, yes.
That's interesting, it's heartwarming, it's promising
for developing countries.
And it's enabled by technology because you're learning
about these people over the web,
you're enabling them to, in a sense,
join the global economy.
Funds can be transferred over the web,
so it makes it much easier to do the transactions
in general.
Absolutely.
Does this, on perhaps a different scale,
translate to how Wainwright functions as well?
Absolutely.
Wainwright, again, they are
very much a company that,
they make smart, strategic decisions,
but there's heart there, and that heart is so obvious.
If you go into a Wainwright bank,
people don't dress like bankers.
They don't act like bankers.
Even the policies they instill for their employees,
giving health benefits to same sex couples,
and making sure that everyone feels comfortable
with who they are as a person
and able to express that at work.
Like I said, those responsive lending products,
that socially progressive, their core target audience
are progressives in the Boston community.
They are a progressive bank.
In fact, they call the mode of banking they do
"socially progressive banking."
They've been shunned for a lot of industry awards
that they should have won, but because people
are afraid to support them because they go to bat
against the war, they go to bat for controversial
issues that no other bank would touch with a ten foot pole.
That's why they're so successful, but that's why
I say more people need to know what they're doing.
I think you said in the book, I don't know if it's
their official corporate motto but, "End in justice."
Yes.
Ending in justice is really what their corporate
goal or their, however you call it,
their high purpose is.
Their higher purpose, right, or their goal.
Let's talk about another bank, HSBC,
while we're on the banking industry.
You talk about some of the progress made
regarding HSBC.
This is a huge corporation, a huge bank,
so let's look at it the other end and some of the
progress you're seeing even with the large banks.
Absolutely.
With HSBC, a lot of it has to do with what's called
transparency, or the banks saying,
"Here's who we're going to finance,
"here's who we're not going to finance.
"Let's talk to people about that.
"Let's talk to people about the net result of
"even our way of doing business.
"Let's talk about the impact we have
"on local communities and the environment,
"and let's be really open about that."
I think that's what struck me about what HSBC was doing,
and also, they took this position, and they are
one of the world's biggest banks.
From HSBC saying things like,
"We are going to take a leadership position
"on global warming before this was the thing to do,"
they were first mover.
That's fascinating.
Imagine the financial power this one organization has
when they decide to put their resources behind something.
That's what's so amazing about these big companies.
It's like with Wal-Mart, probably one of the most
contentious examples.
Certainly not a perfect company, but when they decide
to sell organic, they become the largest retailer
of organic practically overnight.
Right, and that's been hotly debated.
Absolutely, the effect of that.
The effect of that, yes.
Nonetheless, when we're looking at the big picture,
there are always major bumps along the way.
Sure, and also, if you think about middle America,
and the people who shop at Wal-Mart--
Introducing organics, exactly.
Maybe they couldn't afford organic before,
and now they can, or maybe they weren't as aware
of the importance of organic or sustainable fishing,
another issue Wal-Mart has taken on.
That's the upside.
Those are the upsides and the downsides we know about.
You can probably find some things on the site
talking about some of the downsides.
Some say it dilutes the organic standard, for example,
because they have such a large presence that they can.
'Cause you're having to produce on a mass scale.
Again, if you're going to be a pragmatist
and look at the evolution of business,
the evolution of health and consciousness in the species,
it's a bumpy ride.
It is, and like you were saying before,
you need to start somewhere.
Right.
It is not possible for Ford Motor Company,
Jumpstart Ford is this activist group that's always
all over Ford about,
"You're not doing enough, you're not doing enough,
"you're not doing enough."
So Ford introduced a hybrid vehicle,
and they criticized them for not producing enough.
They only produced 25,000.
The next year, they produced 250,000,
and, again, they said, "That's not enough."
Then they invested $2 billion trying to make,
probably one of the most environmentally advanced
manufacturing facilities on the planet, again,
that wasn't enough.
What the company is invovled in,
my argument is those companies are investing
in process change, not PR, not greenwashing.
There is a big difference between process change
and greenwashing, and by following the money trail,
which is exactly what we did, we analyzed these companies,
we followed the money trail, where's the money going?
Is it being reinvested, how is it being reinvested,
and is it producing enough returns to warrant
that continual cycle of self-improvement?
People need to be better at distinguishing between
true and false corporate responsibility or greenwashing
and green growth, which is something that just
doesn't happen on a dime.
You can't turn the Titanic on a dime.
Care to talk about a few companies on the other side
that, right now, you write off, don't appear
to be making any progress whatsoever
or even attempting to besides throwing more
advertising dollars at it?
I don't know what is going on with Halliburton.
Oh, well, there.
I don't think I would throw the towel away
on any company, though.
I don't think I would, and it's not--
Even Haliburton?
Yeah.
If Halliburton would talk to me, people say,
"Who would you work with?"
I haven't worked with any of these companies yet
'cause I wanted to keep distance,
but if Halliburton called and said,
"We'd like you to come in and present to us.
"We'd like you to do some research on us,
"and come back and help us figure,"
I would definitely do it.
That's horrible.
People are like, "Why would you work to advance interest?"
Well, because those are the most damaging companies.
Who wants to work with a perfect company
that's already doing such a great job
they're already--
They don't need you.
On the path.
What about the companies that are off-kilter
a little bit?
A little bit.
It is a little bit, or Monsanto.
I would love to get my hands on Monsanto.
Whether they would want to work for me is completely
after reading my book, something else.
We interviewed another man who did have business
on a corporate level working with corporate
teambuilding at Halliburton,
and he said the interesting thing he found
is that if you got the various managers aside,
one on one, individually--
Individually, they think they're doing the right thing.
They wanted to do more or better,
but everyone one of them had the same fear
and spoke in hush tones, and was afraid
of losing their job--
Don't tell anyone I'm saying this, of course.
And feeling threatened if they thought
any of their other coworkers or other management
knew that they were not satisfied with what's going on,
which is a very interesting point.
Well, yes.
You get down to most people, in their heart,
know what's right, they know what's good.
Even if a company displays, as we said before,
these sociopathic tendencies, that doesn't mean
that all the employees follow suit.
Right, or it doesn't mean that the company's 100%,
incontestibly evil.
Right.
There is no such thing as a totally evil company,
just like there is no such thing as a totally
perfect company, and the same thing goes for people.
There are varying degrees of gray, and it's ridiculous
to judge these companies as good verses bad,
this is a lost cause, this is not a lost cause,
because things are always changing.
That's the reality, so I think there are
definitely people inside some companies
that people would consider "bad."
They're actually very good people that are really
working to move the needle, but based on the
psychology and the culture and maybe how everything
is so siloed and really hierarchical organizations,
it's difficult to make waves.
Well, it's very gracious, the way you put that.
That's the politically pressed answer.
It is, but there is some truth in that as well.
Judgment is a dangerous thing. We all do it.
We all can see, more or less, the values
are fairly painted on the wall in most cases,
we can see that, but nonetheless,
to not give a company a chance to reverse itself
is probably the most dangerous mindset of all.
Everything should be given an opportunity to evolve.
Whether they take that or not appears to be the issue.
Absolutely.
Let's talk a little bit more about transparency.
This is really big.
Now that we have the net, it's really hard
to remain cloaked in the stories.
It changes the game.
It does. What do you see?
I love it, it's fabulous.
I do too. What do you see more as a visionary now?
Are you writing a third book, by the way?
Yes.
It's gonna be about how people trapped in the
Halliburtons of the world can change the game
'cause you gotta do change from within.
I've been reporting on change from the outside
and looking at senior management mostly,
but what about the people working in companies?
What do they do?
That's where I'm headed next.
We'll be back on that one.
I want to hear what you have to say.
Let's look at, for the time being, transparency.
In general, what's it going to take?
Is every company going to have to have a flashlight
shown on their deepest darkest secrets,
or are some actually learning from the example of others?
Both, but here's the weird thing about transparency.
There are a lot of companies that don't even
face the truth themselves.
True.
They're not even totally honest.
They talk themselves into something, this rhetoric,
this language they use, the stuff they say to themselves
like a mantra.
"Social responsibility is the way we do business,"
"It's ingrained into the DNA of our culture,"
all these cliches, they don't know what that really,
what does that really mean?
What does that mean in terms of the way you're
developing products?
marketing those products?
What does that mean in real life?
I think part of the transparency movement,
there are two forces coming together.
One is companies taking a long hard look
in the mirror and saying,
"How much waste are we really producing here?
"How much of a toll are we really taking here?"
Then we have to tell people about it,
and then we have to pledge to improve it.
The reporting of it is one thing, but really,
a lot of companies don't have a firm grasp
on the real impact they have, and so that's a new
movement that's driving this as well.
People have access to the information through the web,
but the companies are now realizing that
if they don't put two and two together, someone else will.
So they've got to get a grasp on it.
Then it's all damage control from there.
Right.
So some final thoughts on this before we
come back for book number three,
final thoughts on The High Purpose Company
that you'd like to share that I haven't asked you about,
and then after that, I'd like to just do a little thumbnail
look at, say, the top five and then maybe the next five
that you'd be surprised at that are positioned to,
perhaps, move into high purpose that might surprise us.
So first of all, the overview.
The overview is that I believe that the way
the socially responsible investment industry
and the CSR industry rates corporate responsibility
really needs to be reassessed 'cause it's not about,
who's the best citizen?
Is Green Mountain Coffee Roaster a company
that has won Best Citizen, number one by business ethics,
the last two years, is that really a better citizen
than, say, Dean's Beans, which is 100% organic fair trade
or any number of other companies?
I think these subjective determinations are
misleading, and they don't really help promote progress.
I don't think that it's just like the SRI industry,
with NFS's list of 100 of the most sustainable companies.
Are BP and Coca Cola truly two of the most
sustainable companies?
Again, no, it's a misnomer, so it causes confusion,
and people question the standards.
I think everyone listening needs to focus on one thing
and one thing only, and that is,
what is the value, not values with an s,
who cares about the values you say you stand for?
What value are these companies really producing?
Look at that value, it's tangible.
In all cases, it's tangible and it's measurable.
That's what's important.
It's about making a difference.
It's not about the talk, it's not about these lists,
it's about, really, who out there is the most valuable,
producing the most value?
When people, when investors and consumers
start to look at companies and reassess companies
that way, and my book explains how to do that,
then you start to see a totally different picture
materialize 'cause you realize it's about the behavior.
It's not about collective, you realize
that by going deep in one area for instance
where a company knows it can make the biggest
difference, it can actually produce a better result
than if it tries to take on everything at once.
These truths start to form and people, I think,
can make better decisions.
What about the companies that you give big thumbs up to
that we may not have already mentioned?
Well, I love some small retail companies
like Eileen Fisher.
They're fantastic.
It's a really interesting phenomenon the way they even run
their company.
They tell you, "Don't throw away last season's clothing."
They do.
Now that's a novel approach.
That is so contrary to the fashion industry
to say, "We don't want you to just use something for
"one season, how ridiculous."
They're taking that counterintuitive approach,
but they're also a purpose-driven company.
They are a company that, for instance,
they decided they didn't want to be about hierarchy
so they are now led by a collective of 14 people.
Even in terms of the way the company is shaping
itself, there are real significant changes there.
That's one to look into.
There are dozens more, jeez.
We've talked about Wainwright.
Maybe a couple others of your favorites.
I think my favorite examples are the contentious ones,
are the ones that people wouldn't really think about.
I like talking about Wal-Mart because I could talk
for hours about Wal-Mart, the good, the bad, the ugly,
but really what the net impact of that is.
I like talking about DuPont, a huge chemical company.
Right, but we didn't get around to that one, actually.
Not a crunchy granola bar company.
Go ahead and talk just a little bit there on DuPont.
By 2010, DuPont hopes to get 25%,
derive 25% of its revenue through what it's calling,
"sustainable solutions" that are essential to a better,
safer, healthier life for people everywhere.
That sounds like a mouthful, but everything
from the scientific advancements DuPont's scientists
are making, the breakthroughs they're having,
to the way the company's investing in biofuels and so forth,
that's the way the company's resources are being allocated,
and that's where the company's, a degree of its growth
is coming from.
That's why Charles Holliday says, and Jeffrey Immelt
from GE, they'll both say,
"We're not investing in green because it's moral,
"because it's trendy, but because it's the right thing
"for our shareholders."
I'm telling you, it's that capitalist thread,
as much as your listeners might hate to hear this,
that's what's going to move the needle.
If that's what drives it, that's what matters.
It certainly does.
Absolutely.
It has so far, at least.
What about some other companies that are poised,
they haven't really made the full commitment
but you're going to be watching?
I'm definitely going to be watching Starbucks.
Everyone complains about Starbucks.
Everybody says they don't source enough fair trade
coffee, certified fair trade coffee,
and their standards aren't--
Or organics.
Right.
But if you look at their cafe model, which they source
116 some odd million pounds of coffee through every year
and how those standards are improving every year.
It's amazing, actually.
They're making a tremendous difference
even though they're not perceived as, by some groups,
as being one of those great, totally responsible companies,
but they are very, I believe, very responsive,
and I think that they're only going to get better.
Anyone else?
I would look at Nike.
Again, getting very close to crossing that threshold.
I would even look closely at Bill Ford Jr. left Ford
but his epiphanies in the company before he left,
I'll be really interested to see if they stay,
if they have staying power and if new management
actually continues with his vision.
I think that's a company to watch as well.
The Gap has made some real end roads to basically
bridging the gap between where they were before.
They have, they've stayed on top of the labor issues.
They have led the industry in terms of that,
in terms of, again, that level of transparency,
letting people know how clothes are made and
where they source, where they get their clothes from.
There are dozens and dozens of companies to watch,
and that's the whole idea.
It's this progression, it's not good, bad, black, white.
Responsibility is a process, just like evolution,
just like anything evolves.
Beautiful work.
Thank you.
Can't wait to see book number three,
and thank you so much for your time.
Thank you for having me.
For more background on Christine's work,
take a look at our first interview with her.
Meanwhile, I recommend you pick up a copy
of her book, High Purpose Company,
by clicking on the link below.
You can bet we'll be back to visit the subject again
as soon as her next book is out.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(upbeat piano music)